sālvo bhaiṣmīvivāhe yadubalavijitaścandracūḍādvimānaṃ
vindan saubhaṃ sa māyī tvayi vasati kuruṃstvatpurīmabhyabhāṅkṣīt |
pradyumnastaṃ nirundhannikhilayadubhaṭairnyagrahīdugravīryaṃ
tasyāmātyaṃ dyumantaṃ vyajani ca samara: saptaviṃśatyahānta: ||1||
sālva: bhaiṣmī-vivāhe	Saalva, in Rukmini's wedding
yadu-bala-vijita:-	by the Yaadava army conquered
candracūḍāt-vimānaṃ	from Shankara the aerial car
vindan saubhaṃ	getting the Saubha
sa māyī tvayi	that elusive one, when Thou
vasati kurūn-	were in Kuru's city (Indraprastha)
tvat-purīm-abhyabhāṅkṣīt	Thy city (Dwaarikaa) attacked
pradyumna:-taṃ	Pradyumna, him
nirundhan-	resisting
nikhila-yadu-bhaṭai:-	with the entire Yadu army
nyagrahīt-ugra-vīryaṃ	killed very powerful
tasya-āmātyaṃ dyumantaṃ	his minister Dyumanta
vyajani ca samara:	and the battle lasted
sapta-viṃśati-ahānta:	twenty seven days
Saalva of magical merits, who was defeated by the Yaadava army at the time of Rukmini's abduction, got Saubh the aerial car as a boon from Shivaa.When Thou were residing in the city of the Kurus, Indraprastha, Saalva attacked Thy city Dwaarika. Pradyumna resisted him heading the entire army of the Yaadavas, and killed his powerful minister Dyumanta. This battle lasted for 27 days.
tāvattvaṃ rāmaśālī tvaritamupagata: khaṇḍitaprāyasainyaṃ
saubheśaṃ taṃ nyarundhā: sa ca kila gadayā śārṅgamabhraṃśayatte |
māyātātaṃ vyahiṃsīdapi tava puratastattvayāpi kṣaṇārdhaṃ
nājñāyītyāhureke tadidamavamataṃ vyāsa eva nyaṣedhīt ||2||
tāvat-tvam rāmaśālī	then Thou with Balaraam
tvaritam-upagata:	quickly reaching
khaṇḍita-prāya-sainyaṃ	almost destroying army
saubheśaṃ taṃ nyarundhā:	the owner of Saubh, him, confronted
sa ca kila gadayā	and he indeed with his mace
śārṅgam-abhraṃśayat-te	Sharanga knocked down, Thine
māyā-tātaṃ	created by magic, father
vyahiṃsīt-api	killed also
tava-purata:-tat-tvayā-api	in front of Thee, that by Thee also
kṣaṇārdhaṃ na-ajñāyi-iti	for a second was not understood
āhu:-eke tat-idam-avayataṃ	say some that, this difference of opinion
vyāsa eva nyaṣedhīt	Vyaas himself refuted
Along with Balaraam Thou quickly reached Dwaarika and confronted Saalva the owner of the aerial car Saubha whose army was almost destroyed. He knocked down Thy bow Shaaranga with a stroke of his mace. He even killed the likeness of Thy father which he had created by his magical abilities. Some say that even Thou were for a moment deceived by this illusion. But sage Vyaas has refuted this opinion.
kṣiptvā saubhaṃ gadācūrṇitamudakanidhau maṅkṣu sālve'pi cakre-
ṇotkṛtte dantavaktra: prasabhamabhipatannabhyamuñcadgadāṃ te |
kaumodakyā hato'sāvapi sukṛtanidhiścaidyavatprāpadaikyaṃ
sarveṣāmeṣa pūrvaṃ tvayi dhṛtamanasāṃ mokṣaṇārtho'vatāra: ||3||
kṣiptvā saubhaṃ	throwing Saubha
gadā-cūrṇitam-	by the mace smashed to powder
udakanidhau maṅkṣu	in the ocean, immediately
sālve-api-cakreṇa-	(when) Saalva also by (Sudarshana discus)
utkṛtte dantavaktra:	was cut off, Dantavaktra
prasabham-abhipatan-	violently attacking
abhyamuñcat-gadāṃ te	hitting with the mace, Thee
kmodakyā	by Kaumudaki
hata:-asau-api	killed he also
sukṛti-nidhi:-	the good deeds repository
caidya-vat-prāpat--aikyaṃ	like Chedi attained union
sarveṣām-eṣa	for all, this
pūrvaṃ tvayi dhṛta-manasāṃ	from long in Thee had fixed their minds
mokṣaṇa-artha:-avatāra:	to liberate was the purpose of the incarnation.
The aerial car Saubha was smashed to pieces with a mace and thrown into the sea, Saalva's head was also cut off by Thy Sudershana discus. Dantavaktra then attacked Thee violently and hit Thee with his mace, thereupon Thou killed him, the repository of good deeds, with Thy mace Kaumodaki. He was fortunate like Shishupal (Chedi) and others who had attained union with Thee. The purpose of this incarnation of Thee was to give liberation to all those who had for long fixed their minds on Thee.
tvayyāyāte'tha jāte kila kurusadasi dyūtake saṃyatāyā:
krandantyā yājñasenyā: sakaruṇamakṛthāścelamālāmanantām |
annāntaprāptaśarvāṃśajamunicakitadraupadīcintito'tha
prāpta: śākānnamaśnan munigaṇamakṛthāstṛptimantaṃ vanānte ||4||
tvayi-āyāte-atha	(when) Thou went back (to Dwaarika)
jāte kila kurusadasi	took place indeed (then) in the Kuru assembly
dyūtake saṃyatāyā:	in the (fraudulent) game of dice was dragged
krandantyā yājñasenyā:	crying Draupadi
sakaruṇam-akṛthā:-	piteously, Thou did
cela-mālām-anantām	her clothing of length endless
anna-anta-prāpta-	(after) the food was over, arriving
śarvāṃśaja-muni-	by a part of Shankara (born), Muni (Durwaasaa)
cakit-draupadī-	by frightened Draupadi
cintita:-atha prāpta:	being thought of Thee, then, reaching there
śāka-annam-aśnan	some leafy vegetable (left over) eating
munigaṇam-akṛthā:-	the sage and his men made
tptim-antam vanānte	satiated fully, in the end of the forest.
After Thy return to Dwaarikaa, a fraudulent game of dice took place in the assembly of the Kurus. Draupadi was dragged there by her hair. Piteously and helplessly crying she prayed to Thee. With compassion Thou endowed her with endless length of clothing. Further, when living in the forest, Draupadi was very frightened because sage Durvaasaa had come there with his people when the food was over. Draupadi again thought of Thee and Thou came to her rescue and ate a bit of the left over leafy vegetable and thereby satiated fully the hunger of the sage and his retinue.
yuddhodyoge'tha mantre milati sati vṛta: phalgunena tvameka:
kauravye dattasainya: karipuramagamo dūtyakṛt pāṇḍavārtham |
bhīṣmadroṇādimānye tava khalu vacane dhikkṛte kauraveṇa
vyāvṛṇvan viśvarūpaṃ munisadasi purīṃ kṣobhayitvāgato'bhū: ||5||
yuddha-udyoge-atha	for the war preparations, then
mantre milati sati	strategies were being made
vṛta: phalgunena tvam-eka:	desired by Arjun Thou alone
kauravye datta-sainya:	to Duryodhana gave the army
karipuram-agama:	to Hastinaapur went
dūtya-kṛt pāṇḍava-artham	in the role of a messenger for the Paandavas
bhīṣma-droṇa-ādi-mānye	by Bhishma Drona and others (Thou) being honoured
tava khalu vacane	(by) Thy indeed by words
dhikkṛte kauraveṇa	rejected by Duryodhana
vyāvṛṇvan viśvarūpaṃ	revealing the Cosmic form
muni-sadasi	in the sage's assembly
purīṃ kṣobhayitvā-	the city shaking went away
gata:-abhū:	having, went away.
As the preparations of the war were on and strategies were decided, Arjuna asked Thee alone to be on his side. Agreeing to that, Thou gave Thy army to Duryodhana. Taking on the role of a messenger of the Pandavas, Thou went to Hastinaapur. Indeed Thy words were honoured by Bhishma, Drona and others but Duryodhana rejected them altogether. Revealing Thy Cosmic form in the assembly of the sages Thou shook up the entire Hastinaapur and returned to Dwaarikaa.
jiṣṇostvaṃ kṛṣṇa sūta: khalu samaramukhe bandhughāte dayāluṃ
khinnaṃ taṃ vīkṣya vīraṃ kimidamayi sakhe nitya eko'yamātmā |
ko vadhya: ko'tra hantā tadiha vadhabhiyaṃ projjhya mayyarpitātmā
dharmyaṃ yuddhaṃ careti prakṛtimanayathā darśayan viśvarūpam ||6||
jiṣṇo:-tvaṃ	of Arjun Thou
kṛṣṇa sūta: khalu	O Krishna! Charioteer indeed
samara-mukhe	in the face of the battle
bandhu-ghāte dayāluṃ	in the relations' killing pitiful
khinnaṃ taṃ vīkṣya vīraṃ	saddened him, seeing that warrior
kim-idam-ayi sakhe	what is this O friend!
nitya:-eka:-ayam-ātmā	eternal and one this Aatmaa (self) is
ka: vadhya:	who is the slain
ka:-atra hantā	who here is the slayer
tat-iha	so here
vadha-bhiyaṃ projjhya	the killing fear giving up
mayi-arpita-ātmā	in me surrendering yourself
dharmyam yuddhaṃ cara-iti	the righteous war carry out
prakṛtim-anayathā:	to a balanced state of mind (thus) brought (him)
darśayan viśvarūpam	showing the cosmic form.
In Thy role as Arjuna's charioteer, Thou saw the warrior sad and dejected in the face of the war, with the pitiful thought of having to kill his relations and his own people. Thou said to him 'O Friend! What is this? Aatman is eternal and only one. Who is the slain and who is the slayer here? Therefore giving up all fear of killing, surrender yourself to Me and carry out this righteous war.' By saying so and showing him Thy cosmic form, Thou brought Arjuna back to a balanced state of mind.
bhaktottaṃse'tha bhīṣme tava dharaṇibharakṣepakṛtyaikasakte
nityaṃ nityaṃ vibhindatyayutasamadhikaṃ prāptasāde ca pārthe |
niśśastratvapratijñāṃ vijahadarivaraṃ dhārayan krodhaśālī-
vādhāvan prāñjaliṃ taṃ nataśirasamatho vīkṣya modādapāgā: ||7||
bhakta-uttaṃse-atha bhīṣme	the leading devotee, then, Bheeshma
tava dharaṇi-bhara-kṣepa-	Thy (purpose of) the earth's burden reducing
kṛtye-eka-sakte	in fulfilling alone engaged
nityaṃ nityaṃ vibhindati-	everyday destroying
ayuta-sama-adhikaṃ	ten thousand about or more
prāpta-sāde ca pārthe	and coming to exhaustion of Arjuna,
niśśastratva-pratijñāṃ	not taking up arms, the vow
vijahat-arivaraṃ	discarding, the great discus
dhārayan krodhaśālī-	holding, in anger
iva-adhāvan	as if running
prāñjaliṃ taṃ	with joined hands him
nataśirasam-atha	(and) bowed head then
vīkṣya modāt-apāgā:	seeing, with joy were full.
Bhishma, one of the leading devotees was intent on helping in fulfilling Thy purpose of reducing the burden of the earth, and was killing almost 10,000 warriors everyday. Arjuna had become very exhausted in resisting Bheeshma. Forgetting Thy vow of not taking up arms in the war, Thou rushed towards Bheeshma with Thy great discus in hand as though in great anger. Bheeshma stood with folded hands and bent down his head as Thou approached him. Seeing him thus Thou were full of joy and desisted from attacking him.
yuddhe droṇasya hastisthiraraṇabhagadatteritaṃ vaiṣṇavāstraṃ
vakṣasyādhatta cakrasthagitaravimahā: prārdayatsindhurājam |
nāgāstre karṇamukte kṣitimavanamayan kevalaṃ kṛttamauliṃ
tatre trāpi pārthaṃ kimiva nahi bhavān pāṇḍavānāmakārṣīt ||8||
yuddhe droṇasya	in the fight with Drona
hasti-sthira-	on an elephant firmly seated
raṇa-bhagadatta-īritaṃ	the fighting Bhagadatta discharged
vaiṣṇava-astraṃ	the Vaishnava (Naaraayana) missile
vakṣasi-ādhatta	on (Thy) chest took
cakra-sthagita-	in (Thy) Sudarshana discus hiding
ravi-mahā:	the sun's rays
prārdayat-sindhurājaṃ	got killed Jayadratha
nāga-astre karṇa-mukte	the Naaga missile discharged by Karna
kṣitim-avanamayan	the earth, by lowering it down
kevalaṃ kṛtta-mauliṃ	only was cut off the crown
tatre tatra-api pārthaṃ	saved there also was Arjuna
kim-iva nahi bhavān	what all did not Thou
pāṇḍavānām-akārṣīt	of the Pandavas, do good
When the fight with Drona was going on Bhagadatta who was firmly seated on an elephant discharged the Vaishnava missile which Thou attracted towards Thy own chest and saved Arjuna. Arjuna was able to kill Jayadratha when Thy Sudarshana discus hid the rays of the sun. Again when Karna discharged the Naaga missile towards Arjuna, Thou lowered the earth by the pressure of Thy toe, so that only Arjun's crown got cut off and Arjuna was saved here also. What all did Thou not do for the benefit of the Paandavas.
yuddhādau tīrthagāmī sa khalu haladharo naimiśakṣetramṛccha-
nnapratyutthāyisūtakṣayakṛdatha sutaṃ tatpade kalpayitvā |
yajñaghnaṃ valkalaṃ parvaṇi paridalayan snātatīrtho raṇānte
samprāpto bhīmaduryodhanaraṇamaśamaṃ vīkṣya yāta: purīṃ te ||9||
yuddha-ādau tīrtha-gāmī	at the beginning of the battle, going for pilgrimage
sa khalu haladhara:	that indeed Balaraama
naimiśa-kṣetram-ṛcchan-	the Naimishyaaranya area covering
apratyutthāyi-sūta-	who had not stood up in respect, that Suta
kṣaya-kṛt-atha	killing then
sutaṃ tat-pade	his son on his seat
kalpayitvā	installing
yajñaghnaṃ valkalaṃ	the destroyer of the Yangyas, Valkala (an Asura)
parvaṇi paridalayan	during the full moon and new moon days, killing
snāta-tīrtha:	completing the pilgrimage
raṇa-ante samprāpta:	towards the end of the war returning
bhīma-duryodhana-raṇam-	the Bheema and Duryodhana fight
aśamaṃ vīkṣya yāta:	prolonged, seeing
purīṃ te	to city, Thine.
Just when the war was to begin Balaraama had gone away on a pilgrimage. He first covered the holy area of Naimishaaranya. Then he killed Suta for not having got up to honour him and installed his son in his place. Then he destroyed the Asura Valkala, who used to destroy the Yagnyas carried out on the full moon and new moon days. Completing his pilgrimage he returned to Kurukshetra. There when he saw the prolonged fight between Bheema and Duryodhana, he went away to Thy city of Dwaarika.
saṃsuptadraupadeyakṣapaṇahatadhiyaṃ drauṇimetya tvaduktyā
tanmuktaṃ brāhmamastraṃ samahṛta vijayo mauliratnaṃ ca jahre |
ucchityai pāṇḍavānāṃ punarapi ca viśatyuttarāgarbhamastre
rakṣannaṅguṣṭhamātra: kila jaṭharamagāścakrapāṇirvibho tvam ||10||
saṃsupta-draupadeya	deep in sleep, the sons of Draupadi
kṣapaṇa-hata-dhiyaṃ	having killed, the evil minded
drauṇim-etya	Drona's son (Ashwatthaamaa) approaching
tvat-uktyā	by Thy saying
tat-muktaṃ brāhmam-astraṃ	discharged by him the Brahamaastra
samahṛta vijaya:	retracted Arjuna
mauliratnam ca jahre	and clipped off his crest jewel
ucchitai pāṇḍavānāṃ	to cut off the line of Paandavas
puna;-api ca	and again also
viśati-uttarā-garbham-	entering Uttaaraa's womb
astre rakṣan-	by the weapon protecting
aṅguṣṭha-mātra: kila	thumb sized merely indeed
jaṭharam-agā:-	in her womb Thou went
cakrapāṇi:-vibho tvam	discus in hand, All Mighty! Thou.
Drona's son, the evil minded Ashwatthaamaa had killed the sons of Draupadi when they were fast asleep. On Thy command Arjuna approached him and retracted the Brahmaastra discharged by him and clipped off his crest jewel.To cut off the line of the Paandavas, Ashwatthaamaa again sent the weapon into Uttara's womb to kill the foetus in there. To protect the foetus Thou entered her womb in the size of a thumb with Thy Sudarshana discus in hand.
dharmaughaṃ dharmasūnorabhidadhadakhilaṃ chandamṛtyussa bhīṣma-
stvāṃ paśyan bhaktibhūmnaiva hi sapadi yayau niṣkalabrahmabhūyam |
saṃyājyāthāśvamedhaistribhiratimahitairdharmajaṃ pūrṇakāmaṃ
smprāpto dvarakāṃ tvaṃ pavanapurapate pāhi māṃ sarvarogāt ||11||
dharmaughaṃ dharmasūno:-	the great Dharmas to Yudhishthira
abhidadhat-akhilaṃ	teaching in totality
chanda-mṛtyu:-sa bhīṣma:-	moment of death, who could decide, he BheeShma
tvāṃ paśyan	Thee seeing
bhakti-bhūmnā-eva hi	by the devotional intensity alone
sapadi yayau	soon attained
niṣkala-brahma-bhūyam	to indivisible Brahma state
saṃyājya-atha-	accomplishing then
aśva-medhai:-tribhi:-	Ashwamedha three
ati-mahitai:-	very great Yangysa
dharmajaṃ pūrṇakāmaṃ	Yudhishthira was fulfilled of aspirations
samprāpta: dvārakāṃ tvaṃ	returned to Dwaarikaa Thou
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi māṃ sarvarogāt	save me from all diseases
The entire great Dharmas were taught to Yudhishthira by Bheeshma who could decide the moment of his death. On seeing Thee, by his devotional intensity alone he attained the indivisible state of Brahman. Thou enabled Yudhishthira to perform three great Ashwamedha Yangyas by which all his aspirations were fulfilled. Then Thou returned to Dwaarikaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! save me from all diseases.